# Future Directions

## Differentiable signal processing

As discussed in Section 2.3, differentiable signal processing provides a method to integrate existing signal processing devices, such as audio effects, directly into the end-to-end gradient-based training framework. This facilitates the ability to build neural networks that inference with audio effects in the context of creating automatic mixing models. While the Differentiable Mixing Console explored this idea in the context of automatic mixing, significant advances in extending techniques in differentiable signal processing have been made. For example, recent works have proposed explicitly differentiable implementations of audio effects such as parametric and graphic equalizers {cite}`kuznetsov2020differentiable,nercessian2020neural,colonel2021reverse,colonel2022direct,steinmetz2022style`, artificial reverberation {cite}`steinmetz2021filtered,lee2022differentiable,clarke2022diffimpact,lyster2022differentiable`, waveshaping distortion {cite}`colonel2022reverse`, as well as dynamic range compression {cite}`steinmetz2022style,wright2022grey,colonel2022approximating`. A clear direction of future work involves the integration of these ideas into a framework similar to DMC with the ability to efficiently extend the expressivity of the mixing console that is controlled by a neural network. 

However, recent work has demonstrated that while 

## Generative models

Through this tutorial we have observed some of the potential limitations of treating the process of creating a multitrack mix as a one-to-one mapping between the input recordings and the mix present within a dataset (i.e. a discriminative model). However, we now know that due to the subjective and largely artistic nature of audio engineering, there clearly exist multiple valid mixtures for any given set of input recordings. This motivates a generative modeling approach where we construct a model $p(\mathbf{Y} | \mathbf{x}_1,  \mathbf{x}_2,  ..., \mathbf{x}_N )$ that explicitly models the data generation process of producing a mixture given the observed input recordings. Thus far, no generative approaches have been applied to this task, but they could provide an important path forward towards building more powerful automatic mixing systems. 

## Datasets

As mentioned throughout the tutorial, one of the main challenges in building powerful automatic mixing systems remains the lack of high-quality annotated datasets. Recently, this has been addressed in part by constructing systems that leverage datasets intended for music source separation {cite}`martinez2022automatic`. There has been significant work in developing these datasets and due to the connection between music source separation and multitrack mixing there is the potential to leverage these datasets. In addition, there has been an interest in leveraging the advancements in music source separation models in order to construct multitrack datasets for the purpose of training automatic mixing systems {cite}`ward2017estimating`. However, there are some limitations to this approach {cite}`steinmetz2021deep`. Future work in extending source separation models to separate mixes into more than four sources in addition to audio effect removal or normalization may be required before this method for dataset creation is viable. 

